Title: BHCast: Unlocking Black Hole Plasma Dynamics from a Single Blurry Image with Long-Term Forecasting

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.26777v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 00:07:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# BHC AST : Unlocking Black Hole Plasma Dynamics from a Single Blurry Image with Long-Term Forecasting 

## Renbo Tu 1,2 Ali SaraerToosi 1,2 Nicholas S. Conroy 3 Gennady Pekhimenko 1,2,4 Aviad Levis 1,21University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 4 NVIDIA 

## Abstract 

The Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) delivered the first im-age of a black hole by capturing the light from its sur-rounding accretion flow, revealing structure but not dynam-ics. Simulations of black hole accretion dynamics are es-sential for interpreting EHT images but costly to generate and impractical for inference. Motivated by this bottleneck, 

BHC AST presents a framework for forecasting black hole plasma dynamics from a single, blurry snapshot, such as those captured by the EHT. At its core, BHC AST is a neu-ral model that transforms a static image into forecasted future frames, revealing the underlying dynamics hidden within one snapshot. With a multi-scale pyramid loss, we demonstrate how autoregressive forecasting can simultane-ously super-resolve and evolve a blurry frame into a co-herent, high-resolution movie that remains stable over long time horizons. From forecasted dynamics, we can then ex-tract interpretable spatio-temporal features, such as pattern speed (rotation rate) and pitch angle. Finally, BHC AST 

uses gradient-boosting trees to recover black hole prop-erties from these plasma features, including the spin and viewing inclination angle. The separation between forecast-ing and inference provides modular flexibility, interpretabil-ity, and robust uncertainty quantification. We demonstrate the effectiveness of BHC AST on simulations of two distinct black hole accretion systems, Sagittarius A* and M87*, by testing on simulated frames blurred to EHT resolution and real EHT images of M87*. Ultimately, our methodology es-tablishes a scalable paradigm for solving inverse problems, demonstrating the potential of learned dynamics to unlock insights from resolution-limited scientific data. 

## 1. Introduction 

The Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) has captured the first images of M87* and Sagittarius A* (Sgr A*) black holes, a landmark in both astrophysics and imaging science, achiev-ing the highest angular resolution ever recorded in astron-omy [15, 16]. To reach this resolution, data from worldwide radio telescopes are combined using Very Long Baseline In-terferometry (VLBI). The result is the first visual evidence Blurry EHT Image      

> BHCast
> Forecasted Frames Extracted Plasma Features Inferred Black Hole Physics
> Optical Flow Pattern Speed Pitch Angle Map Spin a* Inclination i

Figure 1. From a Single Blurry Frame to Black-Hole Dynam-ics. A single blurry image, reconstructed from Event Horizon Telescope measurements, is used to forecast a dynamic sequence of high-resolution frames. From this forecasted movie, features of accretion disk plasma can be extracted to infer the black hole’s physical properties. This sequential framework—forecasting, fea-ture extraction, and parameter estimation—is robust, versatile, and fully interpretable, providing a new pathway for analyzing horizon-scale dynamics. 

of a black hole event horizon. Nonetheless, these static im-ages provide limited insight into the complex plasma dy-namics that power black hole accretion. Capturing and un-derstanding their temporal evolution is key to interpreting EHT data and probing the underlying plasma dynamics [9]. To bridge the gap between static images and dynam-ics, astrophysicists are developing extensive libraries of time-dependent General Relativistic Magnetohydrodynam-ics (GRMHD) simulations [42, 45] which involve solv-ing nonlinear equations of general relativity coupled to multi-scale magneto-hydrodynamics equations for magne-tized fluids [14]. These highly-complex simulations, for the most part, show remarkable consistency with observation data [1, 2, 63]. Inferring black hole properties from such simulations relies on scanning a massive library of GRMHD simulations to find the best match to observations. This pro-cess is computationally prohibitive, as a single simulation can take weeks on a supercomputer, making exploration of large or fine-grained parameter spaces infeasible [14]. This computational bottleneck motivates our work (Fig. 1), which builds on recent advances in physics-informed deep learning [32, 46]. We replace the expensive 

> arXiv:2603.26777v1 [cs.CV] 24 Mar 2026

forward GRMHD simulation with a lightweight neural sur-rogate, which is highly efficient on modern GPUs. Neural surrogate models for fluid dynamics have gained significant traction in recent years, but extending them to black hole plasmas from reconstructed (rather than simulated) EHT images introduces a unique set of challenges [7, 35, 36, 46]. First, EHT images are fundamentally resolution-limited by the telescope’s ∼ 20 μas (micro-arcsecond) beam, creating an ill-posed inverse problem [1]. Recovering the lost high-frequency information, a super-resolution task, is essential to reveal the subtle cues of plasma dynamics encoded in these images. Second, key indicators of black hole dynam-ics require stable forecasts over long temporal horizons of 300 GM c −31 to be measured accurately [9]. Existing re-search focuses on single-step predictions, while autoregres-sive forecasts of long-term dynamics remain a major chal-lenge due to rapid error accumulation [35, 36, 46]. In this paper, we introduce BHC AST , a long-term fore-casting framework designed to produce high-fidelity, super-resolved simulation dynamics from a single, blurry black hole image. Our framework overcomes the instability of autoregressive prediction by incorporating a multi-scale pyramid loss during training. We demonstrate this super-resolution effect and the stability of our predictions in sim-ulations (Fig. 2). Using the forecasted frames, we extract key plasma features that characterize the dynamic and ge-ometric properties of the black hole accretion flow. As an application of BHC AST for inverse problems, we train an XGBoost model to predict black hole parameters from the computed plasma features. Note that our framework pro-vides interpretable inference of plasma and black hole pa-rameters, as recovered parameters can be traced back to vi-sual cues in the forecasted frames. Furthermore, our mod-ular design allows for future improvements across different stages of the BHC AST pipeline. We evaluate the framework in forecasting, feature ex-traction, and parameter inference. For long-term forecast-ing, we demonstrate that BHC AST produces super-resolved and temporally stable predictions, outperforming both end-to-end deep learning and traditional computer vision base-lines. For plasma feature extraction and black hole param-eter inference, BHC AST is more robust to noise compared to direct inference with a black-box supervised baseline. In summary, we make the following core contributions: 1. We recast a challenging, ill-posed astrophysical imag-ing task as a forecasting+inference problem, enabling the use of efficient neural surrogates for rapid black hole characterization. Our reformulation provides a useful roadmap for future works in scientific imaging.        

> 1For gravitational constant G, black hole mass M, and speed of light c,
> GM c −3is the characteristic dynamical timescale near the event horizon which depends on the black hole mass: ∼20 seconds for Sgr A* and ∼9
> hours for M87*. (A) Training (B) Inference
> f(t) U-Net f(t+1) Simulation Frames
> Forecasted Frames
> Laplacian Pyramid f(t+1) 1+ 2 Loss Cylinder Plots Cylinder Plots
> Time-Averaged Cylinder Plot Pattern Speed Ω
> Pitch Angle Φ
> Asymmetry A Rot. Curve Slope
> XGBoost
> Inclination Inclination Spin Spin
> XGBoost
> Blurry Image Super-resolved Frames Autoregressive Forecast Laplacian Pyramid f(t+1) Mean Flux f(t+1) Mean Flux f(t+1)

Dynamics Forecast Model Physics Inference Model   

> Time-Averaged Cylinder Plot PS Ω
> PA Φ
> Asym A Slope

Figure 2. Training and inference pipelines of BHC AST . We train the dynamics forecast model (U-Net) to predict the next frame and the physics inference model (XGBoost) to estimate black hole parameters. During inference, we autoregressively forecast with the U-Net to produce cylinder plots to extract plasma features, which are inputs to XGBoost for physics inference. 

2. Leveraging a physics-informed multi-scale loss, our dy-namics surrogate model super-resolves blurry input im-ages and forecasts stable evolution for up to 100 steps, (500 GM c −3 or 10,000 seconds on Sgr A*), sufficiently long for precise physical measurements. We demon-strate forecasting on real EHT images of M87* 3. BHC AST produces high-fidelity forecasts with accurate dynamic and geometric plasma features. On four fea-tures, the forecast error is comparable with a baseline of four ResNet models trained separately on each feature. 4. For parameter inference, BHC AST estimates black hole spin and inclination angle better than ResNet, demon-strating better robustness to input noise compared to di-rect inference. 

## 2. Related Works 

Multi-Scale and Self-Similarity in Vision Multi-scale representations are foundational in computer vision, from classical pyramid decompositions [6] to coarse-to-fine in-ference and internal image statistics. Natural images ex-hibit strong cross-scale self-similarity, a principle exploited in seminal works on super-resolution and deblurring [22, 33, 40, 67]. These methods show that fine-scale structure can often be reconstructed from recurring patterns already present within a single image. Although developed for nat-ural images, this multi-scale and self-similar perspective aligns well with the fractal, turbulent structure of black hole plasmas, motivating our use of a hierarchical loss to recover high-frequency detail from sparse, resolution-limited data. 

Modeling Dynamics Neural surrogates for dynamical systems typically follow one of two strategies: next-frame prediction or full-sequence generation. Data-hungry diffusion-based approaches for GRMHD data fall into the latter category, generating entire video sequences in a sin-gle pass but requiring the forecast horizon to be fixed a priori [65]. Next-frame prediction is more versatile, as a model can be rolled out autoregressively for arbitrarily long horizons, but this flexibility comes at the cost of com-pounding errors and potential instability during rollout [52]. While Fourier Neural Operators are strong in learning PDE-driven dynamics, they are better suited for systems with global behaviors rather than black holes with local turbu-lence [35, 36]. For these reasons, BHC AST adopts a data-efficient U-Net for next-frame prediction and explicitly ad-dresses long-horizon stability to recover plasma evolution. 

Black Hole Parameter Estimation Inferring physical parameters from EHT observations typically follows one of two approaches: direct inference from EHT visibilities in the frequency domain, or image-based inference in the pixel domain. Recent visibility-domain methods use adap-tive Bayesian inference, but their non-parallelizable MCMC loops create a major computational bottleneck, with indi-vidual runs taking up to 20 CPU hours [64]. To avoid this cost, feed-forward machine learning approaches based on visibility data products have been used for classifica-tion [57], however, this approach is limited to inference of simple physical models. Conversely, image-based infer-ence using supervised learning, explored by Deep Horizon and its extensions, offers a faster alternative [19, 58]. The primary drawback of these ”black-box” approaches is their failure to capture black hole dynamics, limiting the physical interpretability of their predictions. Other methods, such as those based on random fields, can infer from both visibil-ities and images, but they have thus far been limited to a small, fixed set of parameters [34]. 

## 3. Background 

Black Hole EHT-Imaging The EHT achieves an un-precedented angular resolution of ∼ 20 μas by combin-ing millimeter and sub-millimeter radio telescope obser-vations across the globe [16]. Despite the resolution, re-constructed images remain inherently uncertain due to var-ious factors including interstellar scattering, sparse cover-age, and source variability [16, 30, 31, 55]. Together, these effects imply that EHT images can be modeled as a con-volution of the intrinsic black hole emission structure with both astrophysical and instrumental blurring. Despite these challenges, our hypothesis is that the EHT images contain rich dynamical information encoded in the blurry image morphology. Two quantities proposed to characterize black hole dynamics are: (i) the pitch angle , which is the angle between a spiral pattern and the local azimuthal direction [3, 47], and (ii) the pattern speed , which is the angular rate at which a coherent structure (like a spiral arm or brightness pattern) rotates [9]. 

GRMHD Simulations A key challenge in analyzing black hole EHT images is the highly variable environment of the accretion flow, and the plasma around a black hole is analytically intractable. GRMHD simulations therefore serve as the current gold standard for self-consistently mod-eling black hole accretion flows [44]. The resulting 3D plasma states are rendered into 2D image-plane intensities by general-relativistic ray tracing, through integration of the radiative transfer equations [42]. Two key physical param-eters that characterize the morphology and dynamics of the flow in the image plane are: first, the viewing inclination angle i, which sets the angle between the observer’s line of sight and the angular momentum vector of the accre-tion disk; and second, the dimensionless black hole spin a∗,which affects both the emission morphology and the photon trajectories near the event horizon that shape the observed image. The movies have a time resolution of 5 GM c −3 and an angular resolution of 0.5 μas. More information is avail-able in Sec. C [11, 56, 63]. 

Dynamical Systems Attractor and Dissipativity Many complex physical processes, including turbulent flows, can be described as dissipative dynamical systems [41]. A key property of such systems is that their long-term behavior collapses from a high-dimensional state space onto a lower-dimensional, bounded set known as a global attractor. This attractor represents the stable, invariant manifold contain-ing all physically-plausible states of the system’s dynamics [36]. Crucially, these systems possess a basin of attrac-tion : trajectories originating from a larger set of initial con-ditions, even off-manifold states such as a blurry image, are rapidly ”pulled” onto the attractor by the system’s evolution [12, 13]. This dissipative ”pull” is the theoretical basis for our model’s super-resolution. Furthermore, once a trajec-tory is on this stable manifold, it remains there, which is what enables stable, long-horizon forecasting. 

## 4. The BHC AST Framework 

In this section, we introduce BHC AST as a framework that first forecasts dynamics, then extracts plasma features, and finally infers black hole parameters. 

4.1. GRMHD Dynamics Forecast Model 

The core of BHC AST is a dynamics forecast model whose goal is to predict the next state (or frame) of the black hole accretion flow from the current state. This is equivalent to learning a mapping f (xt) 7 → xt+1 , where xt ∈ X repre-sents all possible states of the flow. While many neural ar-chitectures for spatio-temporal forecasting exist, including powerful models such as transformers and neural operators, we select the U-Net architecture for its data-efficiency and inherent convolutional inductive bias for capturing local tur-bulent fluctuations in GRMHDs [35, 49, 59]. A key requirement of the dynamics model is to perform stable, autoregressive prediction for N iterations (f N (x0)) 

from a blurry initial state x0. The model should simul-taneously super-resolve this initial state and maintain sta-ble, physically-plausible dynamics over a long time hori-zon. In dynamical systems terms, long-term predictions are expected to approach and remain within the global attractor 

A [36]. However, a vanilla U-Net trained on the default 

ℓ2 loss rapidly accumulates error and diverges. As a pre-liminary step, we log-normalize the states to compress the dynamic range for numerical stability. More crucially, we introduce a multi-scale loss structure for training. 

Multi-Scale Laplacian Pyramid Loss Standard pixel-wise losses such as ℓ2 treat all spatial frequencies equally, which makes them poorly suited for preserving the holis-tic disk structure and fine-scale spiral features present in GRMHD frames. To encourage consistency across frequen-cies, we adopt a Laplacian pyramid loss that applies super-vision at multiple spatial scales. Such multi-scale objectives have proven effective in stabilizing training and preserving structure in vision tasks [21]. Given M levels and downsample (average pooling), bi-linear upsample operations, for level k ∈ { 0, . . . M },

Lap k(I) = Gk(I) − Upscale (Gk+1 (I)) 

Gk(I) = Downscale (Gk−1(I)) , G 0(I) = I (1) A standard Laplacian pyramid on simulation frames has 7 layers, i.e. k ∈ {0, . . . 6}. Here, we make two key modifications: first, to save computation, we use a subset of the pyramid levels k ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 6} to include both the finest details (k = 0) and intermediate-scale information 

(k = 1 , 2) . However, computing the coarsest, single-pixel level Lap 6 = G6 requires the previous level of the Gaussian pyramid, G5. We make the second modification by replac-ing the coarsest level information Lap 6 with the mean flux, 

Φ( I), such that it can be computed independent of other levels. For an image with dimensions H, W ,

Lap 6(I) := Φ( I) = 1

HW 

> H

X

> i=1
> W

X

> j=1

I(i, j ) (2) The mean flux, Φ( I), represents the spatially-integrated intensity of a single frame. A time-series of mean flux val-ues construct the light curve, a crucial observable in many astrophysics topics beyond black holes, such as exoplan-ets and supernovae [24, 50, 62]. For black holes, the mean 20 40 60 80 100          

> Time Horizon (Frames)
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25 Average LPIPS ( better)
> No Mean Flux
> 2Only
> BHCast
> Figure 3. Loss ablation study. LPIPS across three losses: ℓ2only, multi-scale without mean-flux, and the full BHC AST loss. ℓ2-only performs poorly at all times, while the multi-scale variant works briefly but becomes unstable. The full loss, combining multi-scale and mean-flux terms, yields stable long-term forecasts.

flux’s relationship to the light curve makes it an important observable that constrains the entire energy output of the system. Thus, it is a physical constraint that complements the spatial structure encoded in other levels. In summary, we construct the Laplacian pyramid for both prediction and ground truth to compute the loss term as a weighted sum of losses for each level: 

Ltotal = X LLap 0 + 12 LLap 1 + 14 LLap 2 + 18 LΦ (3) The weights follow a heuristic scale factor and were not hand-tuned [6]. At each scale, the loss term combines ℓ1

and ℓ2 with equal weight to balance the outlier robustness of ℓ1 and ease of optimization of ℓ2.To evaluate the fidelity of the restored details, we use the Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS, lower is better) metric, ensuring that recovered fine-grained structure reflects meaningful physical variability rather than noise [66]. LPIPS measures perceptual similarity beyond pixel-wise metrics like PSNR or SSIM. We perform an ab-lation study on the dynamics model’s training loss. We train two additional dynamics models: (i) using only ℓ2 and (ii) only Laplacian pyramid without the mean flux component. Fig. 3 shows these variants fail in long-term stable forecast-ing. The multi-scale, no-mean-flux model is only stable for the first 20 forecasts. This confirms the importance of mean flux regularization for long-term forecasting. 

4.2. Extracting Plasma Features from Forecast 

Following the autoregressive generation, BHC AST extracts plasma features from the forecasted frames using cylinder plots , which capture the dynamical and geometric proper-ties of the accretion flow [9]. A cylinder plot T (θ, t ) is a 2D function parameterized by position angle θ and time t, com-puted by sampling image intensities along a ring. The ring radius √27 GM c −2D−1 2 is chosen as it approximately 

> 2D denotes distance to the black hole

corresponds to the critical impact parameter for Sgr A*, which defines the visible edge of the black hole shadow. Beyond the primary radius, we evaluate additional cylinder plots at multiple radii, enabling extraction of four quantita-tive features: two dynamical, (i) pattern speed and (ii) ro-tation curve slope, and two geometric, (iii) pitch angle and (iv) asymmetry [4, 9, 10, 47]. The following paragraphs introduce and define each of these features. 

(i) Dynamics: Pattern Speed Ωp The pattern speed, a measure of the apparent angular rotation rate defined through ratios of azimuthal image moments, serves as a sta-tistical descriptor of how the overall structure rotates. Visu-ally, pattern speed is the slope of the brightest feature on a normalized cylinder plot. Ωp depends strongly on inclina-tion angle, a key property of interest [9]. 

(ii) Dynamics: Rotation Curve Slope Recently, Conroy et al. found that rotation rates measured at different dis-tances from the center of the dominant Sgr A* ring exhibit a rotation curve . Rotation speeds are faster closer to the black hole event horizon. The rate of change of the rotation speed at different angular radii, the rotation curve slope ,varies with the black hole’s spin parameter [10]. 

(iii) Geometry: Pitch Angle Φ This quantifies the ge-ometry of coherent spiral structures in the flow by mea-suring how tightly wound the emission arms are around the black hole shadow [47]. It is estimated by comparing the azimuthal structure at neighboring radii in the cylinder plot and identifying the relative angular shift between them. Computationally, this is done by cross correlating two cylin-der plots measured at rring and rring + δr [3]. Pitch angle is correlated with the inclination angle [9, 47]. 

(iv) Geometry: Asymmetry Asymmetry is the amplitude of the sinusoidal function fitted to the time-averaged cylin-der plot. It measures the difference in brightness between the bright side of the ring and the dim side of the ring. This observable feature correlates with spin of the black hole [4]. 

4.3. Physics Inference Model 

The four features from the previous analysis create an in-formation bottleneck, where plasma features identified as important by astrophysicists are distilled from a forecasted simulation. This physics-informed inductive bias enables more data-efficient and robust parameter estimation. The final stage of BHC AST ’s pipeline is a classification model that takes a set of plasma features as input, and outputs a category for the spin parameter a∗ and the inclination pa-rameter i. To train the model, we generate a dataset with plasma features computed on slices of the GRMHD training movies combined with features extracted from forecasts. Instead of a deep neural network, we choose a popu-lar gradient-boosting decision tree framework, XGBoost, to perform the feature classification task. The key consider-ation here is the quantitative feature importance scores and predictive confidence scores from XGBoost, which offer in-terpretable parameter inference results [8]. Our experiments identify pattern speed as most important for inclination clas-sification and asymmetry for spin classification. Full impor-tance score metrics are listed in Sec. B. In addition to inter-pretability, gradient boosting decision trees are well suited for handling heterogeneous tabular data and are invariant to the scale of different features [39]. 

## 5. Forecasting Sgr A* 

We empirically study our proposed framework on the Sgr A* dataset through a three-part evaluation: 1. Most importantly, we demonstrate that our dynamics surrogate model super-resolves a blurry input image and performs long-term stable forecast. 2. From the forecast, we extract plasma features and show that they are consistent with the ground truth. 3. Finally, we infer black hole parameters and demonstrate the robustness of BHC AST to the input image resolution. Note that BHC AST accomplishes all these tasks within a single inference pass, whereas each baseline handles a sin-gle task and must be trained independently. 

5.1. Super-Resolution and Long-Term Forecasting 

This subsection focuses on results for super-resolving a blurry input and long-term autoregressive forecasting. 

Baseline We compare to two alternative forecasting ap-proaches, one deep-learning and one non-learning baseline. While our model simultaneously super-resolves and evolves dynamics, prior research has developed tools that specialize in either super-resolution or forecasting. Thus, our base-lines decouple the two tasks. The learning baseline first uses a pretrained enhanced deep super-resolution network (EDSR), finetuned on GRMHD data, to super-resolve the blurry input image; then, a convolutional LSTM (ConvL-STM) trained on unblurred simulations uses the output from EDSR to forecast dynamics [23, 37, 51]. The non-learning baseline consists of a Wiener deconvolution module fol-lowed by an optical flow model to evolve the image [20, 61]. Given a test frame, we allow access to the ground truth mean optical flow for forecasting. Thus, the non-learning pipeline is an oracle baseline .

Super-Resolution Conventional super-resolution meth-ods operate in a one-shot manner: given a blurry image, the model directly predicts a sharper version in a single step. In contrast, our dynamics-based approach sharpens the image through time: the first predicted frame is noticeably clearer than the input, and each subsequent autoregressive forecast becomes progressively sharper. This behavior arises be-cause the GRMHD simulations form a global attractor – a manifold of physically-plausible states (frames) in the train-ing data. A blurry input, lacking high-frequency detail, lies Initial Frame Initial Frame 

> PSD GT BHCast Oracle

## (A) Face-on Models (B) Edge-on Models 

Step 6 Step 100 Step 100 Step 6 Figure 4. Super-Resolution Evaluation : Power Spectral Density (PSD) and log-scale visualizations of the input, prediction after 6 steps (30 GM c −3 ), and prediction after 100 steps (500 GM c −3 ) for (A) face-on GRMHD and (B) edge-on GRMHD. At input, BHC AST 

> lacks high-frequency details but recovers them by step 6 to match the ground truth PSD. Its forecasts also visually converge to the ground truth. The oracle optical flow baseline starts with the deconvolution result but shows limited super-resolution. The learning-based baseline is omitted due to divergence after a few steps.

off this manifold. The trained dynamics model projects the input back onto the manifold, effectively pulling forecasts into the space of physically realistic states and restoring high-frequency detail. Subsequent predictions remain sta-ble and physically consistent. To evaluate super-resolution, we adopt the power spectral density (PSD) as a measure of spatial detail [48]. A good super-resolved forecast should match the ground-truth PSD. As shown in Fig. 4, averaged across all test cases, BHC AST begins from a low-frequency, blurry input, unlike baselines that super-resolve before fore-casting, yet after six forecast steps its PSD recovers the missing high-frequency content. Fig. 4 illustrates the PSD result with two forecast test cases, one for face-on GRMHD models (top-down view) and one for edge-on (side view). In both cases, BHC AST super-resolves the dominant ring by step 6 and maintains spiral arm features that resemble the ground truth until the end of the forecast. 

Forecast Fidelity Fig. 5 shows the LPIPS over 100 fore-cast steps, averaged over test inputs. The learning base-line deteriorates rapidly, while BHC AST achieves the low-est LPIPS and preserves dynamics throughout the roll-out. 

5.2. Plasma Feature Analysis 

This subsection evaluates the accuracy of plasma features extracted from BHC AST ’s forecast. 

Baseline As a point of comparison, we consider a super-vised regression model that estimates the features directly from the input image, bypassing the cylinder-plots analysis. We train a ResNet50 model similar in parameter count to our U-Net surrogate on (image, feature) pairs, where fea-tures are computed from the training set [25]. Since we compute four distinct features, we treat them as individual tasks and train four separate ResNet models, while BH-CAST extracts all features from a single forecasted movie. As a powerful feature extractor, the ResNet baseline 20 40 60 80 100  

> Time Horizon (Frames)
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> Average LPIPS ( better)
> Blurred GT
> Oracle Baseline
> Learning Baseline
> BHCast

Figure 5. Forecasting Fidelity Evaluation. Perceptual similar-ity (LPIPS; lower is better) between forecasts and the unblurred ground-truth simulation. BHC AST ’s forecast remains visually close to the ground truth over long horizons, while baseline fore-casts are on par with the EHT-resolution blurred input. Table 1. Mean Absolute Error ± Standard Error ( ↓) of ex-tracted plasma features, averaged across all test cases. Our BHCast model is compared against a ResNet baseline. 

Plasma Feature BHC AST ResNet Baseline 

Pattern Speed ( Ωp) 0.46 ± 0.05 0.64 ± 0.07 Pitch Angle ( Φ) 0.13 ± 0.01 0.14 ± 0.02 Asymmetry 0.30 ± 0.03 0.23 ± 0.02 

Rotation Curve Slope 0.24 ± 0.03 0.25 ± 0.03 achieves almost perfect mean absolute error (MAE) on the validation set for each regression task. However, when tested on blurry images, the distribution shift leads to in-creased errors. Tab. 1 compares the MAE with standard error (SE) of BHC AST to the ResNet baselines. Despite ac-cumulating error inherent to autoregressive prediction, BH-CAST extracts pattern speed Ωp significantly better, while remaining on par with direct estimation for other features. In addition to reporting the absolute error, Fig. 6 demon-strates strong correlation of 0.927 between BHC AST ’s ex-tracted and ground truth pattern speeds. Our estimates of counter-clockwise rotation speeds are less biased than the baseline. For the remaining plasma features the correla-tions are 0.758 for pitch angle, 0.626 for asymmetry, and 

0.610 for rotation curve slope. Correlation plots for these additional features are provided in Sec. B. 

5.3. Black Hole Parameter Inference 

This subsection presents the parameter inference accuracies and robustness to shifts in the input image distribution. 

Baseline Since our GRMHD data only covers discrete values of spin and inclination , a convolutional neural net-work can directly predict the class from an image. We train two additional ResNet50 models, one for inclination and one for spin, until convergence. There are two classes for spin prediction: prograde ( a∗ > 0) and retrograde ( a∗ < 0), 1.5 0.5 0.5 1.5       

> Ground Truth
> 1.5
> 0.5
> 0.5
> 1.5
> Prediction
> Ours: r= 0.927
> ResNet: r= 0.851
> Clockwise rot.
> Counterclockwise rot.
> Pattern Speed pCorrelation
> Ours
> ResNet
> ResNet direction error
> Perfect correlation

Figure 6. Pattern Speed Correlation . Extracted pattern speed from a 60-frame forecast shows a very strong correlation of 0.927 with the ground truth values. In addition, BHC AST identifies sep-arate clusters for clockwise and counter-clockwise rotation, show-ing significantly less bias than the baseline when estimating coun-terclockwise rotation. Table 2. Classification accuracy of black hole parameters, com-paring BHC AST to a ResNet baseline. The 20 μas (EHT-like) resolution is the baseline. The 25 μas and 30 μas rows show the performance degradation (or stability) as blurring increases, with differences ( ∆) relative to the baseline.                     

> Blurring Level Model Inclination Accuracy Spin Accuracy 20 μas (Baseline)
> BHC AST 56.41% 69.22% ResNet 47.19% 67.66% 25 μas BHC AST 56.72% (+0.31) 71.09% (+1.87) ResNet 31.41% (-15.78) 54.53% (-13.13) 30 μas BHC AST 53.44% (-2.97) 65.78% (-3.44) ResNet 25.47% (-21.72) 44.37% (-23.29)

and four classes for inclination prediction: negative face-on, negative edge-on, positive edge-on, positive face-on. At test time, we vary the blurring kernel to differ from the standard EHT-resolution of 20 μas to include 25 μas and 30 μas options for testing robustness to distribution shift. Evaluated on 640 samples, Tab. 2 demonstrates the supe-rior accuracy of BHC AST with the standard 20 μas EHT-resolution blurring. Moreover, changing the blurring ker-nel leads to massive degradation of the supervised baseline. In contrast, BHC AST is robust to different blurring kernels, due to effective super-resolution of the dynamics model and the accuracy of plasma feature estimation. We include ad-ditional robustness studies in Sec. B. 

Uncertainty Quantification via Bootstrapping We per-form bootstrapping by training an ensemble of 100 mod-els on random 80% portions of the training set of plasma features. On the held-out validation set, we measure the ensemble’s aleatoric uncertainty via average score entropy and epistemic uncertainty via average variance [27, 28]. In Tab. 3, the extremely-low epistemic uncertainties for both spin and inclination prediction indicate that the ensemble unanimously agrees on predictions. The errors stem from a small portion of data outliers as aleatoric uncertainty. Dataset and Experiment Details Our GRMHD dataset consists 32 Sgr A* movies, each with a temporal window of 1,000 simulation frames with resolution 100 × 100 pixels. We partition the movies into 800/100/100 frames for train-ing/validation/test sets respectively. For dynamics forecast-ing, a U-Net is trained on consecutive GRMHD frames from the training set, totaling 25,000 frame pair samples. For pa-rameter inference, an XGBoost model is trained on plasma features computed on consecutive 60-frame slices from the training set and 60-frame forecasts from the trained U-Net, and the source GRMHD movie spin and inclination are used as labels. Over 30,000 samples of (plasma features, black hole label) data are generated for training. During testing, input frames are blurred to EHT resolution and two frames apart (10 GM c −3 ) within the test set. The time horizon for test-time forecast is 60 frames (300 GM c −3 ), such that we balance having sufficient evaluation samples and a signifi-cant length for accurate plasma features. For hyperparame-ters and model specifications, refer to Sec. A. 

## 6. Forecasting M87* 

In this section, we test the generalization of BHC AST by applying it to a new black hole system, M87*. Since M87* GRMHD data is very limited compared to Sgr A*, it is chal-lenging to train a standalone dynamics model for M87*. 

6.1. M87* Parameter Estimation 

Previous VLBI measurements have estimated the inclina-tion angle of M87* as either 17°or 163° [60]. The ambigu-ity between the two options remains due to uncertainty as to whether the accretion disk angular momentum is pointed towards or away from Earth. Given a blurry test M87* GRMHD image, we leverage an important heuristic that pattern speed has the same sign as cos( inclination ) to con-strain this value [9]. We produce a forecast from the input image and compute the pattern speed to check its sign. We classify input images with positive predicted pattern speeds to 17°and negatives to 163°. On 168 forecasts, BHC AST 

achieves 78.6% accuracy on negative samples and 58.3% 

on positive samples without any training on M87* data. 

6.2. Testing on Real M87* Images 

Although BHC AST was trained only on simulations and not on EHT reconstructions, we evaluate it on real observational                            

> Table 3. An ensemble of XGBoost bootstrapped models achieves high accuracy with low epistemic uncertainty. This demonstrates that the extracted plasma features are effective and lead to stable, unanimous predictions.
> Metric Spin Model Inclination Model
> Validation Accuracy 0.94 0.87 Aleatoric Uncertainty 0.15( ∈[0 ,1]) 0.42( ∈[0 ,2])
> Epistemic Uncertainty 0.003 (∈[0 ,1]) 0.004 (∈[0 ,1] )Mean Confidence 0.96 ±0.10 0.88 ±0.15 EHT Images  Forecast Forecast Blurred
> Apr 6, 2017 Apr 11, 2017 Step 1 ~ Apr 8 Step 2 ~ Apr 10 Step 3 ~ Apr 12
> Figure 7. Extrapolation on EHT M87* image . We use the April 6 EHT image as input and validate our forecasting ability by com-paring the blurred forecast after three autoregressive steps with the April 11 EHT image. BHC AST successfully resolves the correct ring structure (red circle) and predicts a counterclockwise rotation, consistent with the EHT reconstructions.

data: the EHT images of M87*. The April 2017 EHT cam-paign captured M87* over multiple days; the April 6 and April 11 reconstructions are separated by approximately 15 

GM c −3 , corresponding to 3 steps of our dynamics forecast model. Fig. 7 shows our forecast result resolving a stable ring structure with the correct radius. Moreover, our model predicts a counterclockwise brightness shift along the ring, consistent with the observed April 11 EHT image. Addi-tionally, we achieve 68.9% accuracy in rotation prediction on the augmented test set of M87* images in Tab. 10. 

## 7. Conclusion and Discussion 

We introduced BHC AST , a framework that forecasts black hole dynamics from a single, blurry image. Using a physics-informed multi-scale loss, our dynamics surrogate model produces both super-resolved and stable predictions over long temporal horizons. From these forecasts, we extract physically meaningful plasma features, and use them to in-fer key properties of the black hole system. BHC AST there-fore enables dynamical analysis even from highly blurred EHT images. Looking ahead, we plan to extend BHC AST ’s inference capabilities to the multi-day M87* movie cam-paign. By recasting a traditionally static inverse problem into a modular task of stable forecasting and physical in-ference, BHC AST suggests a new paradigm for scientific imaging, where dynamics are not just a byproduct of obser-vation, but a foundational tool for discovery. Acknowledgment 

We thank Rohan Dahale for assistance with plasma feature computation and the PI-vision group/EcoSys group at Uni-versity of Toronto for useful feedback on the paper. We thank Kamyar Azizzadenesheli for his important role in guiding the project. We thank Charles Gammie from UIUC for providing crucial data used in this work. RT and GP are supported by the Canada Foundation for Innovation JELF grant, NSERC Discovery Grant, Google Scholar Research Award, VMware Early Career Faculty Grant/Award, Ontario Early Researcher Award, and the Vector CIFAR AI Chair award. NC is supported by the NASA Future Investigators in NASA Earth and Space Science and Technology (FINESST) program. This ma-terial is based upon work supported by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grant No. 80NSSC24K1475 issued through the Science Mission Di-rectorate. AS and AL are supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). This work was supported by the Ontario Research Fund – Research Excellence under Project Number RE012-045. This work was further supported by NSF grants AST 17-16327 (horizon), OISE 17-43747, and AST 20-34306. This research used resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership Com-puting Facility at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725. This research used resources of the Argonne Leadership Com-puting Facility, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357. This research was done using services provided by the OSG Consortium, which is supported by the National Science Foundation awards #2030508 and #1836650. This research is part of the Delta research computing project, which is supported by the National Science Foundation (award OCI 2005572), and the State of Illinois. Delta is a joint effort of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and its National Center for Supercomputing Applications. 

## References 

[1] Kazunori Akiyama, Antxon Alberdi, Walter Alef, Juan Car-los Algaba, Richard Anantua, Keiichi Asada, Rebecca Azu-lay, Uwe Bach, Anne-Kathrin Baczko, David Ball, et al. First sagittarius a* event horizon telescope results. v. testing astro-physical models of the galactic center black hole. The Astro-physical Journal Letters , 930(2):L16, 2022. [2] K Akiyama et al. The event horizon telescope collaboration, first m87 event horizon telescope results. iii. Data processing and calibration, Astrophys. J , 875:L3, 2019. [3] Michi Baub¨ ock, Nicholas S. Conroy, Vedant Dhruv, Daey-oung Lee, Chi-Kwan Chan, Abhishek V. Joshi, Ben S. Prather, and Charles F. Gammie. Spiral Feature Pitch An-gles from Event Horizon Telescope Movies. The Astrophys-ical Journal , 2025. in preparation. [4] Vadim Bernshteyn, Nicholas S. Conroy, and Michi et al. Baub¨ ock. Ring Asymmetry and Spin in M87*. arXiv e-prints , art. arXiv:2601.00394, 2026. [5] G. S. Bisnovatyi-Kogan and A. A. Ruzmaikin. The Accretion of Matter by a Collapsing Star in the Presence of a Magnetic Field. Astrophysics and Space Science , 28(1):45–59, 1974. [6] Peter J Burt and Edward H Adelson. The laplacian pyramid as a compact image code. In Readings in computer vision ,pages 671–679. Elsevier, 1987. [7] Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary differential equa-tions. Advances in neural information processing systems ,31, 2018. [8] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 785–794, 2016. [9] Nicholas S Conroy, Michi Baub¨ ock, Vedant Dhruv, Daey-oung Lee, Avery E Broderick, Chi-kwan Chan, Boris Georgiev, Abhishek V Joshi, Ben Prather, and Charles F Gammie. Rotation in event horizon telescope movies. The Astrophysical Journal , 951(1):46, 2023. [10] Nicholas S Conroy, Michi Baub¨ ock, Vedant Dhruv, Daey-oung Lee, Chi-kwan Chan, Abhishek V Joshi, Ben Prather, and Charles F Gammie. Event horizon telescope pat-tern speeds in the visibility domain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.08848 , 2025. [11] Vedant Dhruv, Ben Prather, George N. Wong, and Charles F. Gammie. A Survey of General Relativistic Magnetohydro-dynamic Models for Black Hole Accretion Systems. The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series , 277(1):16, 2025. [12] Anurag Dutta, John Harshith, A Ramamoorthy, and K Lak-shmanan. Attractor inspired deep learning for modelling chaotic systems. Human-Centric Intelligent Systems , 3(4): 461–472, 2023. [13] J-P Eckmann and David Ruelle. Ergodic theory of chaos and strange attractors. Reviews of modern physics , 57(3):617, 1985. [14] Zachariah B Etienne, Vasileios Paschalidis, Roland Haas, Philipp M¨ osta, and Stuart L Shapiro. Illinoisgrmhd: an open-source, user-friendly grmhd code for dynamical spacetimes. 

Classical and Quantum Gravity , 32(17):175009, 2015. [15] Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration, K. Akiyama, A. Al-berdi, W. Alef, and et al. First m87 event horizon telescope results. i. the shadow of the supermassive black hole. Astro-physical Journal Letters , 875(1):L1, 2019. [16] Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration, K. Akiyama, A. Al-berdi, W. Alef, and et al. First sagittarius a* event horizon telescope results. i. the shadow of the supermassive black hole in the center of the milky way. Astrophysical Journal Letters , 930(2):L12, 2022. [17] Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration, K. Akiyama, A. Al-berdi, W. Alef, and et al. First sagittarius a* event horizon telescope results. iv. variability, morphology, and mitigation strategies. Astrophysical Journal Letters , 930(2):L15, 2022. [18] Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration, K. Akiyama, and et al. A persistent shadow of the supermassive black hole in m87. Astrophysical Journal Letters , 957(1):L20, 2023. [19] Joseph Farah, Jordy Davelaar, Daniel Palumbo, Michael Johnson, and Jonathan Delgado. Machine and deep learning–driven angular momentum inference from bhex ob-servations of the n= 1 photon ring. The Astrophysical Jour-nal , 983(2):185, 2025. [20] Gunnar Farneb¨ ack. Two-frame motion estimation based on polynomial expansion. In Scandinavian conference on Im-age analysis , pages 363–370. Springer, 2003. [21] Golnaz Ghiasi and Charless C Fowlkes. Laplacian pyramid reconstruction and refinement for semantic segmentation. In 

European conference on computer vision , pages 519–534. Springer, 2016. [22] Daniel Glasner, Shai Bagon, and Michal Irani. Super-resolution from a single image. In 2009 IEEE 12th interna-tional conference on computer vision , pages 349–356. IEEE, 2009. [23] Gabriel Gouvine. Super-resolution networks for pytorch. 

https : / / github . com / Coloquinte / torchSR ,2021. [24] EK Grassberg, VS Imshennik, and DK Nadyozhin. On the theory of the light curves of supernovae. Astrophysics and Space Science , 10(1):28–51, 1971. [25] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 770–778, 2016. [26] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising dif-fusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. [27] Eduard Hofer, Martina Kloos, Bernard Krzykacz-Hausmann, J¨ org Peschke, and Martin Woltereck. An approximate epis-temic uncertainty analysis approach in the presence of epis-temic and aleatory uncertainties. Reliability Engineering & System Safety , 77(3):229–238, 2002. [28] Neil Houlsby, Ferenc Husz´ ar, Zoubin Ghahramani, and M´ at´ eLengyel. Bayesian active learning for classification and pref-erence learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1112.5745 , 2011. [29] Igor V. Igumenshchev, Ramesh Narayan, and Marek A. Abramowicz. Three-dimensional Magnetohydrodynamic Simulations of Radiatively Inefficient Accretion Flows. The Astrophysical Journal , 592(2):1042–1059, 2003. [30] S. Issaoun, M. D. Johnson, L. Blackburn, A. Broderick, P. Tiede, M. Wielgus, S. S. Doeleman, H. Falcke, K. Akiyama, G. C. Bower, C. D. Brinkerink, A. Chael, I. Cho, J. L. G´ omez, A. Hern´ andez-G´ omez, D. Hughes, M. Kino, T. P. Krichbaum, E. Liuzzo, L. Loinard, S. Markoff, D. P. Mar-rone, Y. Mizuno, J. M. Moran, Y. Pidopryhora, E. Ros, K. Rygl, Z.-Q. Shen, and J. Wagner. Persistent non-gaussian structure in the image of sagittarius a* at 86 ghz. The Astro-physical Journal , 915(2):99, 2021. [31] Michael D. Johnson, Ramesh Narayan, Dimitrios Psaltis, Lindy Blackburn, Yuri Y. Kovalev, Carl R. Gwinn, Guang-Yao Zhao, Geoffrey C. Bower, James M. Moran, Motoki Kino, Michael Kramer, Kazunori Akiyama, Jason Dexter, Avery E. Broderick, and Lorenzo Sironi. The scattering and intrinsic structure of sagittarius a* at radio wavelengths. The Astrophysical Journal , 865(2):104, 2018. [32] George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu Yang. Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics , 3(6):422–440, 2021. [33] Anat Levin, Yair Weiss, Fredo Durand, and William T Free-man. Understanding and evaluating blind deconvolution al-gorithms. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 1964–1971. IEEE, 2009. [34] Aviad Levis, Daeyoung Lee, Joel A Tropp, Charles F Gam-mie, and Katherine L Bouman. Inference of black hole fluid-dynamics from sparse interferometric measurements. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 2340–2349, 2021. [35] Zongyi Li, Nikola Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede Liu, Kaushik Bhattacharya, Andrew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for para-metric partial differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895 , 2020. [36] Zongyi Li, Miguel Liu-Schiaffini, Nikola Kovachki, Burigede Liu, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Kaushik Bhat-tacharya, Andrew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Learn-ing dissipative dynamics in chaotic systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.06898 , 2021. [37] Bee Lim, Sanghyun Son, Heewon Kim, Seungjun Nah, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Enhanced deep residual networks for single image super-resolution. In Proceedings of the IEEE confer-ence on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops ,pages 136–144, 2017. [38] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances in neural informa-tion processing systems , 30, 2017. [39] Duncan McElfresh, Sujay Khandagale, Jonathan Valverde, Vishak Prasad C, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, Micah Goldblum, and Colin White. When do neural nets outperform boosted trees on tabular data? Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 36:76336–76369, 2023. [40] Tomer Michaeli and Michal Irani. Nonparametric blind super-resolution. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pages 945–952, 2013. [41] John Milnor. On the concept of attractor. Communications in Mathematical Physics , 99(2):177–195, 1985. [42] Monika Moscibrodzka and Charles F. Gammie. ipole - semi-analytic scheme for relativistic polarized radiative transport, 2017. [43] Ramesh Narayan, Igor V. Igumenshchev, and Marek A. Abramowicz. Magnetically Arrested Disk: an Energetically Efficient Accretion Flow. Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan , 55(6):L69–L72, 2003. [44] Oliver Porth, Koushik Chatterjee, Ramesh Narayan, and Charles F. Gammie et al. The event horizon general rela-tivistic magnetohydrodynamic code comparison project. The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series , 243(2):26, 2019. [45] Ben S. Prather. KHARMA: Flexible, Portable Performance for GRMHD. arXiv e-prints , art. arXiv:2408.01361, 2024. [46] Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning frame-work for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal of Computa-tional physics , 378:686–707, 2019. [47] Angelo Ricarte, Daniel C. M. Palumbo, Ramesh Narayan, Freek Roelofs, and Razieh Emami. Observational signatures of frame dragging in strong gravity. The Astrophysical Jour-nal Letters , 941(1):L12, 2022. [48] Dirk Robinson and Peyman Milanfar. Statistical perfor-mance analysis of super-resolution. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 15(6):1413–1428, 2006. [49] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmen-tation. In International Conference on Medical image com-puting and computer-assisted intervention , pages 234–241. Springer, 2015. [50] Jeremy D Schnittman, Julian H Krolik, and John F Hawley. Light curves from an mhd simulation of a black hole accre-tion disk. The Astrophysical Journal , 651(2):1031, 2006. [51] Xingjian Shi, Zhourong Chen, Hao Wang, Dit-Yan Yeung, Wai-Kin Wong, and Wang-chun Woo. Convolutional lstm network: A machine learning approach for precipitation nowcasting. Advances in neural information processing sys-tems , 28, 2015. [52] Kiwhan Song, Boyuan Chen, Max Simchowitz, Yilun Du, Russ Tedrake, and Vincent Sitzmann. History-guided video diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06764 , 2025. [53] Alexander Tchekhovskoy, Ramesh Narayan, and Jonathan C. McKinney. Efficient generation of jets from magnetically arrested accretion on a rapidly spinning black hole. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters , 418(1): L79–L83, 2011. [54] The Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration, Kazunori Akiyama, Antxon Alberdi, Walter Alef, and Keiichi Asada et. al. First m87 event horizon telescope results. v. physi-cal origin of the asymmetric ring. The Astrophysical Journal Letters , 875(1):L5, 2019. [55] The Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration, Kazunori Akiyama, Antxon Alberdi, Walter Alef, Juan Carlos Algaba, Richard Anantua, and Asada et al. First sagittarius a* event horizon telescope results. iii. imaging of the galactic center supermassive black hole. The Astrophysical Journal Letters ,930(2):L14, 2022. [56] The Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration, Kazunori Akiyama, Antxon Alberdi, and Walter Alef et al. First sagit-tarius a* event horizon telescope results. v. testing astrophys-ical models of the galactic center black hole. The Astrophys-ical Journal Letters , 930(2):L16, 2022. [57] Nithyanandan Thyagarajan, Lucas Hoefs, and O Ivy Wong. Interferometric image reconstruction using closure invariants and machine learning. RAS Techniques and Instruments , 3 (1):437–452, 2024. [58] Jeffrey Van der Gucht, Jordy Davelaar, Luc Hendriks, Oliver Porth, Hector Olivares, Yosuke Mizuno, Christian M Fromm, and Heino Falcke. Deep horizon: A machine learn-ing network that recovers accreting black hole parameters. 

Astronomy & Astrophysics , 636:A94, 2020. [59] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszko-reit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [60] R Craig Walker, Philip E Hardee, Frederick B Davies, Chun Ly, and William Junor. The structure and dynamics of the subparsec jet in m87 based on 50 vlba observations over 17 years at 43 ghz. The Astrophysical Journal , 855(2):128, 2018. [61] Norbert Wiener. Extrapolation, interpolation, and smooth-ing of stationary time series . The MIT press, 1964. [62] Joshua N Winn, Matthew J Holman, Guillermo Torres, Pe-ter McCullough, Christopher Johns-Krull, David W Latham, Avi Shporer, Tsevi Mazeh, Enrique Garcia-Melendo, Cindy Foote, et al. The transit light curve project. ix. evidence for a smaller radius of the exoplanet xo-3b. The Astrophysical Journal , 683(2):1076, 2008. [63] George N. Wong, Ben S. Prather, Vedant Dhruv, Ben-jamin R. Ryan, Monika Mo´ scibrodzka, Chi-kwan Chan, Ab-hishek V. Joshi, Ricardo Yarza, Angelo Ricarte, Hotaka Sh-iokawa, Joshua C. Dolence, Scott C. Noble, Jonathan C. McKinney, and Charles F. Gammie. PATOKA: Simulating Electromagnetic Observables of Black Hole Accretion. The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series , 259(2):64, 2022. [64] AI Yfantis, S Zhao, R Gold, M Mo´ scibrodzka, and AE Brod-erick. Testing bayesian inference of grmhd model parameters from vlbi data. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society , 535(4):3181–3197, 2024. [65] Bingliang Zhang, Zihui Wu, Berthy T Feng, Yang Song, Yisong Yue, and Katherine L Bouman. Step: A gen-eral and scalable framework for solving video inverse prob-lems with spatiotemporal diffusion priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07549 , 2025. [66] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shecht-man, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion , pages 586–595, 2018. [67] Maria Zontak and Michal Irani. Internal statistics of a single natural image. In CVPR 2011 , pages 977–984. IEEE, 2011. A. BHC AST Pipeline Details 

This section provides model information and hyperparam-eters used during training and evaluation for each stage of the framework. 

A.1. Dynamics Forecast Model 

First, we report the model details of the U-Net surrogate and other baselines. 

U-Net The U-Net used in our experiments has the same architectural hyperparameters as those defined in the original paper [49], based on a standard encoder-decoder design with skip connections. The network comprises four downsampling steps and four corresponding upsampling steps. 

Encoder: 

• DoubleConv blocks: two 3 × 3 convolution layers, each followed by batch normalization and ReLU activation. • Downsampling: 2 × 2 max pooling with stride 2. • Number of channels (features) starts from 64 and reaches 1024 at the end of the encoder. 

Decoder: 

• DoubleConv blocks same as above. • Transposed Convolution: reduces channel size by a factor of 2 with 2 × 2 convolution with stride 2. • Skip connections: outputs from transposed convolution are concatenated with encoder feature maps via skip connections. 

Output Head: 1 × 1 convolution to map the 64-channel feature map to the number of output channels, which is 1. All hyperparameters for training are as follows: 

batch_size: 128 optimizer: AdamW learning_rate: 0.001 weight_decay: 0.0001 scheduler: cosine t_max: 500 epochs: 500 loss: Multi-scale Laplacian Pyramid 

Oracle Baseline Our non-learning baseline consists of a Wiener deconvolution module with an estimated PSF and an optical flow module [20, 61]. Given a test frame, we give the baseline access to the training frames for the same movie to compute the following: PSF estimation starts with a kernel size very close to the ground truth blurring kernel size. Noise-to-Signal Ratio (NSR) for Wiener deconvolu-tion is computed on the training set. Optical flow is the mean of the training set. We list the details below: • PSF Estimation (Calibration): The Point Spread Func-tion (PSF) is modeled as a Gaussian kernel. The op-timal standard deviation is estimated via a grid search that minimizes the Mean Squared Error (MSE) between the convolved unblurred training frames and the observed blurred frames. • Wiener Deconvolution: The initial blurred test frame is restored using Wiener deconvolution in the frequency do-main. NSR is estimated by calculating the ratio of the residual noise power to the signal power of the unblurred training frames. • Mean Optical Flow: Optical flow maps are computed between consecutive unblurred training frames using the Farneback algorithm. These fields are averaged over the training set to produce a single, static ”Mean Flow” field representing the global dynamics. Hyperparameters of the oracle baseline: 

PSF estimation: kernel_size: 21 sigma_grid: 0.5 to 6.0 (23 steps) num_samples: 50 Wiener deconvolution: nsr_clip_min: 1e-6 nsr_clip_max: 1e3 Farneback optical flow: pyr_scale: 0.5 levels: 3winsize: 25 iterations: 3poly_n: 7poly_sigma: 1.5 

Learning Baseline Our learning baseline consists of a EDSR network for super-resolving the blurry input ( xt) and a ConvLSTM network for forecasting dynamics by autore-gressively producing N frames (xt+1 , . . . x t+N ) based on the super-resolved image [37, 51]. The EDSR model is fine-tuned from a pre-trained model, while the ConvLSTM model is trained from scratch. Hyperparameters of the learning baseline: 

EDSR: EDSR variant: 16 Blocks, 64 Filters scale_factor: 2 residual_scale: 0.1 fine_tune_epochs: 5 ConvLSTM: layers: 2hidden_channels: [64, 64] kernel_size: 3x3 training_epochs: 30 training: optimizer: AdamW learning_rate: 1e-4 batch_size: 128 input_seq_len: 1

Compute Comparison In Tab. 4, we compare the param-eter count and GFLOPs count between the learning baseline and BHC AST ’s dynamics forecast U-Net. Though ConvL-STM has a lower parameter count, the overall FLOPs of the baseline far exceed the U-Net, which does not involve LSTM cell gates. For training, we provide the same com-pute budget of 5 GPU hours for the EDSR fine-tuning and ConvLSTM training to match that of the U-Net.                

> Table 4. Comparison of models in terms of trainable parameters and floating-point operations (FLOPs).
> Model Parameters FLOPs (G) EDSR (Super-Resolution) 1.37 M6.87
> ConvLSTM (Dynamics) 0.45 M17 .81
> EDSR + ConvLSTM (Combined) 1.82 M24 .68
> BHC AST (Ours - U-Net) 31 .04 M8.12

Additional Modern Baselines: FNO and Diffusion We compare BHC AST to two additional deep learning base-lines representing state-of-the-art approaches in dynami-cal systems modeling. Different from the aforementioned multi-stage baselines, the Fourier Neural Operator(FNO) and Diffusion models are single-stage and perform end-to-end frame generation like the U-Net [26, 35]. Hyperparameters of FNO: 

n_modes: (128, 128) hidden_channels: 64 n_layers: 6 in_channels: 1out_channels: 1projection_channel_ratio: 2norm: group_norm epochs: 500 

Hyperparameters of 3D-Conditional Diffusion: 

seq_len: 10 in_channels: 2 (class-conditioned) out_channels: 1block_out_channels: (32, 64, 128, 256) layers_per_block: 2num_train_timesteps: 1000 beta_schedule: linear num_inference_steps: 50 learning_rate: 1e-4 weight_decay: 1e-4 batch_size: 1 gradient_accumulation_steps: 4 epochs: 100 

Compute Comparison between Additional Baselines 

We report compute in Tab. 5, including both model size and total forecasting FLOPs count. We also measure train-ing cost in GPU hours on the same hardware. Most impor-tantly, we compare inference throughput in frames per sec-ond (FPS) to measure forecasting efficiency. We find that U-Net is 27.1 × faster in inference compared to Diffusion, which guarantees fast roll-outs and ensemble-based uncer-tainty estimates. The efficiency factor of U-Net is crucial for scaled-up parameter inference in the upcoming M87* EHT movie campaigns that increase the number of recon-structed frames and pipeline variants.                       

> Table 5. Compute/throughput comparison. Diffusion uses 20 denoising steps and is evaluated with FP16 AMP due to memory constraints; other models are evaluated in FP32.
> Model Param Roll-out Training Inference Name Count(M) FLOPs (G) GPU Hrs FPS
> FNO 409.01 39.63 19.1 110.45 Diffusion 28.64 75340.88 146.5 17.91 U-Net 31.04 486.95 5.5 485.20

A.2. Plasma Feature Extraction Module 

For the extraction module, we provide details to the plasma analysis for each feature. 

Pattern Speed Ωp Extracting pattern speed requires a cylinder plot computed at the predefined ring radius √27 GM c −2D−1. For the cylinder plot T , we start by con-verting pixels on the ring to angular positions across time to a 2D matrix with dimensions (prediction temporal length, number of angular positions). T is then normalized to ˜T

through taking its log and subtracting its mean [9]. 

Ωp is calculated from the second moments of the au-tocorrelation function ξ of a normalized cylinder plot ˜T ,namely: 

ξ(∆ t, ∆θ) = 1

σ2 F−1(|F ( ˜T )|2) (4) where σ2 is the variance of ˜T and F is the Fourier trans-form. The ratio of second moments of ξ yields Ωp.

Rotation Curve Slope In addition to the fixed ring radius for Sgr A* rring = √27 GM c −2D−1, we compute 5 addi-tional pattern speeds measured at heuristic-based factors of the radius {0.75 , 0.9375 , 1.125 , 1.3125 , 1.5} × rring [10]. The rotation curve slope is the slope of the best first-order fit to the pattern speeds. Pitch Angle Φ Φ is derived from correlating two cylinder plots, taken at radii rring and rring + δr , where δr = 0 .1

[3]. 

θ∗ = argmax 

> θ

(ξ( ˜T (rring ), ˜T (rring + δr ))  (5) 

Φ = arctan( θ∗

ln(( rring + δr )/r ring ) ) (6) 

Asymmetry While previous features require 2D cylinder plots, asymmetry uses a 1D, time-averaged cylinder plot to fit a sinusoidal function [4]. The function has the following form: 

A ∗ cos( θ + θ0) + CAsymmetry := A/C  (7) 

ResNet50 Baseline We provide model details and train-ing hyperparameters of the supervised regression model, ResNet50: 

input_channels: 1output_dim: 1 (Scalar Regression) training: optimizer: AdamW learning_rate: 1e-3 weight_decay: 1e-4 batch_size: 128 epochs: 100 scheduler: CosineAnnealingLR loss_function: MSELoss 

Compute Comparison In Tab. 6, we compare the com-putation requirements of our approach and the baseline. We did not train on a larger supervised learning model since ResNet50 already achieves near-perfect error on the valida-tion set by memorizing the training data. 

Table 6. Comparison of parameter count and FLOPs count be-tween our framework and ResNet50. Note that baseline is task-specific; extracting all four physical parameters requires training four separate ResNet models. 

Model Parameters (M) FLOPs (G) ResNet50 (Single Task) 23.50 0.99 

4× ResNet50 (All Tasks) 94.02 3.96 

BHCAST (Ours) 31.04 8.12 20 40 60  

> Time Horizon (Frames)
> 0.025
> 0.050
> 0.075
> 0.100
> 0.125
> 0.150
> 0.175
> 0.200
> Average LPIPS ( better)
> FNO
> Diffusion
> BHCast

Figure 8. Forecasting Fidelity of FNO and Video Diffusion. 

A.3. Physics Inference Model 

The hyperparameters used for the XGBoost classifier for physics inference, mostly unchanged from the default val-ues, are as follows: 

n_estimators: 1000 max_depth: 6learning_rate: 0.05 subsample: 0.8 colsample_bytree: 0.8 min_child_weight: 1.0 gamma: 0.0 reg_alpha: 0.0 reg_lambda: 1.0 objective: multi:softprob eval_metric: mlogloss 

## B. Expanded Empirical Results 

To validate BHC AST , we have conducted extensive empir-ical experiments, and results from this section should com-plement those in Sec. 5 and Sec. 6. 

B.1. Dynamics Forecasting 

For a video visualization of BHC AST forecasts, refer to our project webpage. We also include a LPIPS compari-son between U-Net and models with global inductive bi-ases (FNO/Diffusion) in Fig. 8, which shows the quality of U-Net forecasts comparable to a compute-intensive diffu-sion model at long horizons. In addition, FNO diverges in forecast after ∼15 steps despite higher model capacity and training with the multi-scale Laplacian loss introduced in Sec. 4. This suggests that for modeling local turbulent fluxes in GRMHD, the local inductive bias of the U-Net is critical, particularly where data efficiency is required. 

B.2. Plasma Feature Extraction 

Feature Estimation Error In Tab. 7, we present the re-sults of feature estimation where BHC AST is compared to the ResNet50 baseline, as a full version of Tab. 1. Table 7. Estimation MAE of extracted features ± standard error of extracted plasma features, grouped by different black hole spin a∗. This table is the fully expanded Tab. 1 

.Pattern Speed Ωp ∈ R Pitch Angle Φ ∈ [0 , 1] Asymmetry ∈ R+ Rotation Curve Slope ∈ R

Spin ( a∗) BHC AST ResNet BHC AST ResNet BHC AST ResNet BHC AST ResNet 

-0.94 0.72 ± 0.11 0.80 ± 0.17 0.16 ± 0.03 0.11 ± 0.04 0.23 ± 0.05 0.22 ± 0.04 0.25 ± 0.05 0.29 ± 0.06 -0.5 0.37 ± 0.14 0.51 ± 0.08 0.08 ± 0.01 0.07 ± 0.02 0.27 ± 0.04 0.15 ± 0.04 0.14 ± 0.02 0.13 ± 0.01 0.5 0.26 ± 0.08 0.38 ± 0.10 0.12 ± 0.04 0.19 ± 0.05 0.32 ± 0.08 0.41 ± 0.06 0.27 ± 0.09 0.28 ± 0.07 0.94 0.50 ± 0.05 0.85 ± 0.15 0.14 ± 0.02 0.18 ± 0.04 0.39 ± 0.08 0.15 ± 0.03 0.30 ± 0.07 0.30 ± 0.08 

Mean 0.46 ± 0.050 0.64 ± 0.065 0.13 ± 0.014 0.14 ± 0.020 0.30 ± 0.033 0.23 ± 0.022 0.24 ± 0.031 0.25 ± 0.031 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 

> Forecast Horizon
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> Pattern Speed Error  Pattern Speed Prediction Error vs Forecast Horizon
> Absolute Error

Figure 9. Pattern Speed Error Plateaus vs. Horizon 

Feature Estimation Stability In all our plasma feature estimate, we select a fixed forecast horizon of 60 frames (300 GM c −3 ). To justify this choice, we conduct an ab-lation study on the forecast horizon from 30 frames to 90 frames. Note that beyond the lower bound, the measured feature becomes subject to noise and thus not meaningful, while beyond the upper bound the forecast becomes entirely uncorrelated. Fig. 9 shows a regime where pattern speed error plateaus (≈ 60–80 frames), indicating that feature es-timates remain stable even as frames decorrelate. The 60-frame horizon is a sweet spot to minimize chaotic drift with enough frames to avoid noisy measurements. The abla-tion indicates that the BHC AST pipeline forecasts roll-outs that match spatio-temporal statistics of GRMHD dynam-ics, even if pixel-level trajectory tracking becomes impossi-ble due to chaos. 

Feature Correlation Results To complement Fig. 6, we present the correlation plots for the three other fea-tures. Fig. 10 shows comparable correlation between our dynamics-based approach and the ResNet baseline. Fig. 11 demonstrates a stronger correlation for BHC AST . Finally, Fig. 12 shows a better correlation for ResNet, but most of ResNet’s predictions are biased towards zero. This is shown in the cluster of ResNet predictions on the bottom left. 

B.3. Physics Inference Model 

B.3.1. Robustness Study 

Tab. 2 demonstrates BHC AST ’s robustness to different blur levels of the input image, which is a key advantage of our pipeline compared to a supervised baseline. We study the performance of physics inference with additional noise sce-narios: (1). a salt-and-pepper noise is injected, randomly setting 1% of the pixels to min or max values with equal probability; (2). the frame is horizontally shifted by 5% of its width, while the lost pixels are filled with zeroes. In both scenarios, Tab. 8 shows BHC AST beating the ResNet baseline in black hole inclination and spin classification. Note that our pipeline demonstrates exceptional robustness in spin classification, as the accuracy barely degrades at all. 

Table 8. Robustness analysis of BHC AST versus the ResNet base-line under input noise scenarios. BHC AST demonstrates stability in spin accuracy under noise and translation. 

Scenario Model Inclination Acc. Spin Acc. Only Blurring ResNet50 47.19 67.66 

BHC AST 56.41 69.22 

Blurring ResNet50 33.12 (-14.07) 52.19 (-15.47) 

+ Salt & Pepper (1%) BHC AST 45.16 (-11.25) 67.50 (-1.72) 

Blurring ResNet50 28.75 (-18.44) 53.91 (-13.75) 

+ Translation (5%) BHC AST 33.44 (-22.97) 73.44 (+4.22) 

B.3.2. Interpretability Analysis XGBoost Importance Scores Gradient Boosting Trees provide direct insight on the importance of each feature in classification. Tab. 9 lists normalized importance scores globally, for spin classification, and for inclination classi-fication. 

Shapley Additive Explanations (SHAP) SHAP uses shapley values from game theory to explain the output of -0.6 -0.2 0.2 0.6 1.0     

> Ground Truth
> -0.6
> -0.2
> 0.2
> 0.6
> 1.0
> Prediction
> Ours: r= 0.610
> ResNet: r= 0.609

Rotation Curve Slope Correlation 

> Ours
> ResNet
> Perfect correlation

Figure 10. Rotation Curve Slope Correlation: Two methods show comparable correlation. 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8     

> Ground Truth
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Prediction
> Ours: r= 0.758
> ResNet: r= 0.545

Pitch Angle Correlation 

> Ours
> ResNet
> Perfect correlation

Figure 11. Pitch Angle Correlation: BHC AST demonstrates a stronger correlation. 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2     

> Ground Truth
> 0.0
> 0.4
> 0.8
> 1.2
> Prediction
> Ours: r= 0.626
> ResNet: r= 0.928

Asymmetry A/C Correlation 

> Ours
> ResNet
> Perfect correlation

Figure 12. Asymmetry Correlation: although ResNet has a stronger correlation, its predictions are highly biased towards 0 when asymmetry is low. Table 9. XGBoost Feature Importance Scores. The Global col-umn represents the importance for the joint (Spin, Inclination) classification task. The specific Inclination and Spin columns show which features dominate when predicting either of them. Notably, Pattern Speed is the primary feature for Inclination in-ference, while asymmetry is the critical feature for Spin. 

Plasma Feature Global (Joint) Inclination Spin 

Pattern Speed (Ω p) 0.2625 0.3683 0.2314 Pitch Angle (Φ) 0.2686 0.2065 0.2567 Asymmetry 0.3314 0.2809 0.3833 

Rot. Curve Slope 0.1376 0.1443 0.1285 

machine learning models, and it is frequently used for tree interpretability [38]. SHAP informs us how and in which direction a feature influences a particular classification re-sult, such as positive/negative spin or edge-on/face-on incli-nation. Fig. 13 and Fig. 14 show two interpretability studies on spin and inclination classification. The results are consis-tent with prior astrophysics research: (1) asymmetry is an important observable that correlate with spin a∗; (2) pat-tern speed is consistent with the sign of cos( inclination ).These imply that our XGBoost physics inference model is 

right for the right reasons . Interestingly, our results also reveal unexpected relationships, such as large pitch angle 

Table 10. M87* EHT eval via test-time augmentation (TTA). Augmentation Count Correct Rotation (%) 

Base (original) 5 4/5 (80.0) Translation ( ∆ ∈ {− 2, −1, 1}) 15 10/15 (66.7) Blur (PSF scale ×{ 0.9, 1.1}) 10 7/10 (70.0) Correlated noise (corr=1.0) 20 14/20 (70.0) All TTA (perturbed only) 45 31/45 (68.9) 

contributing to face-on inclination classification and low ro-tation curve slopes contributing to edge-on. 

B.4. Extrapolation to M87* 

To complement qualitative results in Sec. 6, we prioritize real-data evaluation by expanding to 5 M87* EHT im-age reconstructions . BHC AST measures pattern speeds on roll-outs from EHT images and matches the expected rotation on 4/5 real reconstructions (Tab. 10). To quantify robustness, we apply Test-Time Augmentation via image perturbations, yielding 68.9% rotation matching. Further-more, for uncertainty quantification on M87*, we evaluate BHC AST on 168 simulation frames using a 100-model en-semble (Fig. 15). The model achieves 68.5% zero-shot ac-curacy with high confidence 0.71 ±0.12 and low epistemic uncertainty 0.05. 

## C. Supplement on GRMHD and EHT Imaging 

C.1. EHT Imaging 

We provide further explanation on sources contributing to the blurriness of EHT images. Chief among these is in--50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0       

> SHAP value (impact on model output)
> Rotation Curve Slope
> Pitch Angle
> Asymmetry
> Pattern Speed p
> Prediction of positive spins
> Low
> High
> Feature value -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0
> SHAP value (impact on model output)
> Rotation Curve Slope
> Pitch Angle
> Asymmetry
> Pattern Speed p
> Prediction of negative spins
> Low
> High
> Feature value

Figure 13. SHAP analysis for spin classification: SHAP values indicate asymmetry acts as the main feature for determining spin. High asymmetry values (red dots) push the models towards pre-dicting positive spin (top plot), while low asymmetry values (blue dots) are strongly associated with negative spin predictions (bot-tom plot). -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0 5      

> SHAP value (impact on model output)
> Rotation Curve Slope
> Pitch Angle
> Asymmetry
> Pattern Speed p
> Prediction of positive face-on Inclinations
> Low
> High
> Feature value -40 -30 -20 -10 0
> SHAP value (impact on model output)
> Rotation Curve Slope
> Pitch Angle
> Asymmetry
> Pattern Speed p
> Prediction of negative edge-on Inclinations
> Low
> High
> Feature value

Figure 14. SHAP analysis for inclination classification: Differ-ent from spin, pattern speed is the main feature for determining inclination. High pattern speed values (red dots) indicate positive inclinations, and vice versa. Notably, high pitch angle values con-tribute to face-on classifications, whereas low rotation curve slopes contribute to edge-on. -0.94 -0.5 0.5 0.94     

> Spin
> -1.5
> -1.0
> -0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> Pattern Speed
> Accuracy: i=17: 58.33%, i=163: 78.57%, Overall: 68.45%
> Uncertainty from 100-model ensemble:
> Mean aleatoric: 0.80 ± 0.19
> Mean epistemic: 0.05 ± 0.02
> Mean confidence: 0.71 ± 0.12
> i=17
> i=163
> i=17 (Mean ±SE)
> i=163 (Mean ±SE)

Figure 15. M87* Pattern Speed Uncertainty Quantification. 

terstellar scattering, which causes refractive and diffractive blurring of the incoming wavefronts [30, 31]. In addi-tion, the sparse coverage of very-long-baseline interferom-etry (VLBI) leads to incomplete sampling of Fourier modes of the source brightness distribution, limiting image fidelity and contributing to intrinsic maximum resolution of the ob-servations. Finally, the finite aperture synthesis and tem-poral averaging required to build an image further smear small-scale variability [16, 55]. Now, we expand upon quantities that characterize black hole dynamics, pattern speed and pitch angle [3, 9]. Asmall opening angle corresponds to tightly wound spirals, whereas a large opening angle indicates more open, loosely wound structures. This metric is sensitive to magnetized turbulence and the development of instabilities in the accre-tion flow, and has been used in GRMHD analyses as a diag-nostic of dynamical state [47]. In EHT applications, both the pattern speed and spiral opening angle can in principle be inferred from the temporal variability of interferometric observables, but in practice the sparse telescope coverage and scattering make these classical approaches extremely challenging. These limitations motivate the development of dynamics-aware inference frameworks, such as the one we introduce, which aim to extract these quantities directly from data or surrogate-generated movies in a robust manner. 

C.2. GRMHD Simulations 

In this subsection, we provide information on the physi-cal model and scientific codebase underlying the GRMHD simulations. GRMHDs model the dynamic evolution of the accretion flow through evolving the magnetized relativistic fluid by solving the source-free evolution equation for the magnetic field, constrained by the no-monopole condition, equations of particle number conservation and conservation of energy-momentum [44]. Typically, GRMHDs are evolved for times longer than 

3 × 10 4 GM/c 3. GRMHD accretion-flow models are typ-ically categorized into two regimes: Standard and Normal Evolution (SANE) and Magnetically Arrested Disks (MAD) [5, 29, 43, 53]. We limit our dataset to MAD simulations 

as they are currently favored for explaining horizon-scale behavior in both M87* and Sgr A* [54, 56]. In this regime, strong magnetic flux accumulates near the black hole, com-pressing the accretion disk into a compact, highly dynamic structure. The GRMHD models used in this paper are from the “Illinois v3” library. The fluid simulations are generated using the KHARMA code and imaged with the ipol code [42, 45]. Although the same GRMHD framework applies to both M87* and Sgr A*, their observational contexts differ in ways that motivate our approach. M87*, with a mass of 

∼ 6.5 × 10 9 in solar mass units, evolves on month-long dy-namical timescales, making time-averaged simulation im-ages appropriate for comparison with EHT data [15, 18]. In contrast, Sgr A* is ∼ 10 3 times less massive and varies on minute timescales within a single observing run, where time-averaging washes out physical structure [16, 17]. This rapid variability highlights the need for dynamics-aware methods, such as the framework we develop, that can model and interpret the evolving structure of the accretion flow.